# Lecture (2022-09-15)

## Compilation

We’ll get into this a little more when we discuss using multiple source files, but we need a cursory knowledge of how compilation works.

There are three particularly significant components involved in the
compilation process:

- The preprocessor
  - Directives are given to a program, largely to do concatenations and substitutions, with minimal control logic included
  - Think of it as translating one form of source code into a different one
- The compiler
  - The compiler takes the amended translation units, and compiles them into object files
  - Like executable machine code, but still missing libraries, or connections to each other
- The linker
  - Connects object files, and libraries, to make an executable

There might also be an assembler involved.

Bad Example:

```C
#define SSQ 4

for(int i = 0; i < SSQ; i++) {

}
```

Preprocessor would replace instances of SSQ with defined value. 

## So, what are we writing?

We’re writing the source files. For the most part, we usually won’t worry about anything lower than that.

- In C, source files typically end with `.c`, while *header* files end with `.h`
- In C++, `.cpp` is the most common (though `.h` is probably still more popular than `.hpp`)
- Decent compilers are capable of accepting different *targets* (for cross-compiling), as well as following multiple *standards*

- Windows uses a CR & LF character for new lines
- *nix systems just use LF

## About source files

The source files themselves are simply plaintext. It’s also worth knowing:

- As hinted at earlier, programs can be broken up into multiple files, for logical separation and modularity
  - For C, this can be done however you feel appropriate
  - For C++, it’s highly advisable to model solutions as you would for any other Object-Oriented language
- The result can be distributed as a library, or simply be an application
- Each file could contain any of: preprocessor directives, constant and variable declarations, external/static variables, procedures/functions, etc.

Also, you can include a `main` function, to represent the entry point into
the application.

**Note**: Intitial programs/assignments will not require object orientation.

## Compiler

For this course, we’ll be using the GNU Compiler Collection (gcc).

- GCC actually supports a wide range of languages
  - It’s not unheard of to ‘make a compiler’ by writing software to first translate another language into C, and then compile it
  - Specifically, we’ll be compiling via the command `g++`

Of course, there are numerous other compilers, but GNU is pretty popular for Unix-derived systems.

`gcc` offers several advanced features (including stopping before the linker phase to invoke it manually at a later time, choosing different levels of compilation optimization, and targeting entirely different architectures), but we’re not likely to need those any time soon.

## Final thought on gcc and g++

Please remember that you have a valuable resource at your disposal in the man pages.

- You aren’t expected to remember how to include libraries, or turn more warnings on, or activate pedantic mode

## The Preprocessor

Though we’ll be learning more about this later, we probably can’t avoid using the preprocessor at least a little.

Basically, the preprocessor can perform substitutions akin to running *macros*. For example, two important directives are:

- `#include`
  - Similar to, though distinct from, an *import* in Java or Python
  - Closer to copying and pasting code from other sources files into the current one, but without needing to actually include it
  - Good for forward declarations/function *prototypes*, constants, and typedefs
  - This facilitates the use of multiple source files, but can also introduce its own conflicts
- `#define`
  - Primarily defines a symbolic replacement
    - One use is for *include guards* (more on this later)
  - Another is to define a literal to use as a subsitution for a term
    - Almost like a constant...
    - Please try to avoid this usage, when possible

## Example Program

I think this is a good time for our first sample program. How about something completely original?

```C
#include <stdio.h>
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
    printf("Hello class!");
}
```

C++ is mostly C compatible. For C++:

```C++
#include <iostream>
int main(int argc, char *argv[]){
    std::cout<<"Hello Class!"<<std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

To return function code:

```bash
echo $?
```

## Should we explain that?

- `#include <iostream>` — we tell the preprocessor that we’ll be using IO from the *Standard Template Library*
- `int main` — main actually has a return. After exiting, it tells the OS whether or not it exited on an error
- `int argc` and `char *argv[]` (or `char **argv`) — this is how we’ll be able to pass in additional command-line parameters
- `cout` — an object wrapping around the *standard output stream*
- `<<` — a stream insertion (that returns a reference to the same stream)
- `endl` — a newline character
- `std::` — we wish to access something within another *namespace*

`<<` left shifts bits of a string into stdout. `endl` flushes output buffer, useful in threading.

## Values and types

C++ supports a pretty wide range of types. Generally, operations will require matching types, so be aware of typing, even when only dealing with values.

- `int`
  - `short int` (or `short`)
  - `int`
  - `long int` (or `long`)
  - `long long int` (or `long long`)
  - `sizeof(short)` ≤ `sizeof(int)` ≤ `sizeof(long)`
- `char` and `bool` are a little special
- Floating point
  - `float` — typically 32 bit
  - `double` — typically 64 bit
  - `long double` is also a thing, but less common
- Are these signed or unsigned? How do we define strings?

No `byte` type in C++. Letters shouldn't go into negatives.

## Using literals

More often than not, if you want to use a value explicitly, you can just type it.

However, there are some times when you might need to be less ambiguous:

- You can append suffixes like U, L, or sometimes LL to values to ensure that they’re `unsigned`, `long`, `long long`, etc.
- If you want to ensure that a literal will be treated as a floating point value, make sure it has a decimal component
- You can express your integer values as:
  - Base 10 — by just typing the number
  - Octal — with a leading `0` (e.g. `x=013`)
  - Hexadecimal — with a leading `0x` (e.g. `x=0x0B`)
  - Binary — as of the C++14 standard, with a leading `0b` (e.g. `0b00001011`)

## Casting and coercion

Suppose I have an `int k`, and I’d like it to have the contents of `double d`. Could I just say `k=d;`?

Maybe this is a good time to explain the difference between *strongly-typed* languages, and *weakly-typed* languages...

Still, we can do the conversion explicitly with a cast: `k=(int)d;`

Pop quiz! What would you expect from: `2/3`? What about `2/3.0`? How about `2.0/3`?

## Variables and assignment

I think it’s finally time to start declaring some variables!

A variable represents the label for a place in memory that can be used to hold data. Its symbol is associated with a type, which must be declared from the first creation of the variable.

- e.g. `int k;`
- `int k=4,m,n;`
- `char c=-’A’;` (why is this a thing?)

This brings up our first official operator: assignment.

An assignment has a left-hand side (LHS), and a right-hand side (RHS). An RHS may be an expression or a variable, but an LHS can only be a variable.

Fun fact: an assignment is still an expression, and returns the value being assigned. This allows for multiple assignments! (example time!)

**Be bloody careful with this.**

```C++
int k, m;
double d, e;
k=d=m=e=3.6;
```

Assignments return their value. This is a bad example because it mixes `int` and `double` types.

## Scope and extent

This will be of somewhat limited use until we address functions and using multiple source files, but we still need to know how *scope* and extent work. (but first, do we remember *what* they are?)

- Block-level variables are automatic (`auto`) by default — they’re allocated upon entering the block, and deallocated upon leaving the block. Describes *most* local variables
- A variable at the file-level (global-ish) scope will persist for the translation unit’s duration of use. It’s effectively *static*, but that’s different from the `static` keyword (which actually has several uses)
- Now that we’ve already started to introduce namespaces, scope is already a bit more complicated. In a few weeks, we’ll also introduce an *external* (`extern`) variable
- `volatile` is used to mark variables that might be accessed by external threads or modules
- You can also define a variable to be `register`, but this is only a suggestion to the compiler

Extent is the lifetime of the variable, ex a variable inside a function has an extent of the function block.


- `using` has same functionality as `import` in Java.
- Standard I/O allows for redirection of input/output
- Piping vs arrow in bash

